- [Instructor] When working with collections,
the order of elements comes into play quite often,
but order isn't always as straightforward
as you might think.
For example, if I ask you to order these coins,
you would likely place them in order
by their monetary value as we see in the picture.
Things like currency, letters and numbers
have a default way they're compared like monetary value,
alphabetical order or numeric value.
When we perform these default comparisons
on a group of objects,
it places them into an order known as their natural order.
However, there's cases where the natural order
isn't what's required.
A coin collector might order the coins
by their size for storage,
or maybe by the year that they were minted.
When writing code that must order objects,
these same types of considerations appear.
The concept of natural order also applies
to most common Java data types.
Dates are naturally ordered chronologically,
numbers like int and long use their numeric value
and strings are ordered alphabetically.
So you might wonder how the natural order
of these data types is determined,
or how would we specify the natural order
for a custom class that we built.
In Java, the comparable interface is used
to specify the natural order of a data type.
Classes that implement the interface
define a compare to method that accepts another object
as an argument.
This argument is evaluated against the current instance.
The comparison logic built into the type
can be used by other code,
like a collection or a sort method to determine
the natural order for a group of objects with that type.
On the interface, you'll notice the compare to method
returns an integer that has a special meaning.
It indicates the result of the compare to method
after the current instance is evaluated against the instance
provided to the method as an argument.
Let's call the current instance this,
and we'll call the object that it's compared against that.
When we compare this to that,
the result will be one of three outcomes
that we're going to demonstrate using some pseudocode.
If the current instance or this is greater
than the provided instance or that,
the compare to method returns any positive number.
When the method is used for sorting,
it would cause this to be placed after that in the order.
If this is less than that,
the method returns any negative number.
This outcome would cause this to appear before that
in the sort order.
And finally, if this is equal to that,
the method returns zero.
Using these values returned by the comparable
allows objects of a type to be placed
into their natural order.
But sometimes we want to use something
other than the natural order.
For these situations, we can use a comparator.
A comparator is another interface that is implemented
by a class that compares two objects.
Unlike the comparable, which performs the comparison
inside of the type that you're comparing,
this comparison occurs externally in another object.
To do that,
two objects are passed as arguments into the compare method.
This method performs the comparison of the two objects
and returns an integer that follows logic
similar to the comparable.
In Java eight,
the comparable interface was updated to include
many new static and default methods
that can be used for chaining comparators.
One trick you can use to remember how a comparator works
is to think of it like a balancing scale with two objects.
Like the scale,
the comparator needs two objects to perform its comparison.
Now that we better understand order,
let's take a look at how collections
are sorted in our next lesson.